---
title: "CSStem"
date: 2017-08-23T17:33:14-08:00
---

# CSStem

I’m trying to distill some design wisdom I’ve come across over the years doing front-end work. There’s always this phase of any project where designers have a system of styles and components in Sketch or Illustrator. Sometimes this system is ad-hoc and sometimes it’s quite premeditated and referential. Either way the system must be translated to code by developers.

In the code world, we strive to define things as few times as possible (ideally once) and reuse things where we can while still allowing us to easily break out of the defaults where we need to without much effort.

Getting this all set up is easier said than done and many times the system is quite clean until part way through the project where it gets messy all of a sudden when some assumption made earlier suddenly doesn’t apply after all.

I’m being deliberately general here since what I want to do is put forth a few simple rules to derive the specifics from. These are:

**Avoid semantic styles**

When I was first introduced to atomic CSS I started to realize how problematic commonly created custom CSS rules like `button` and `top-navigation` were. This is the root of unmaintainable and impossible to reuse styling. Atomic CSS espouses composition of small rules. If `button` is a rounded corner box with a border and gradient it’s better to have rules for the border style and background applied separately to form a component called `button` rather than describing the styling directly in CSS.

**Themes are pulled instead of pushed**

It’s tempting to create page-level rules that define things like font sizes and colors. This is dangerous because it’s hard to prevent unwanted side effects in the components to which the rules are applied. It’s also tempting to create top-level rules that affect only certain things on the page but not others by pure coincidence such that later changes will cause undesirable effects that need to be locally overridden. Theme elements should be available globally but applied locally. I’m referring to this as “pulling” values from a global context rather than having the CSS engine “pushing” things down automatically from the stylesheet.

**Themes consist of a fixed set of attributes**

Decide on a fixed set of things that are part of a theme. This includes colors, sizes, border radii, etc. Provide default values in the theme. Having well-known theme elements will avoid confusion and allow re-theming to be done smoothly without errors.

**Use sequences/functions (scales) for sizes**

I learned a secret about layout from a CSS library called Tachyons. The idea here is that you don’t need that many pixel sizes to make a well-designed layout. In fact the sizes/proportions that aren’t used are just as important as the ones that are. Make omission part of the design. An example here (I never used this, and it probably looks bad but it illustrates the point) is to use a Fibonacci sequence for margin sizes [1,1,2,3,5,8,13…]. I think of these like a musical scale. There are certain notes (sizes) in the scale but some are omitted.

**Distill intent**

It’s important to specify the meaning of layout and positioning. What I mean by this is that sometimes designers will nudge spacing around elements to that they line up in some way that isn’t explicit by looking at the design. For example an element might be two-thirds of the way down its parent but looking at the Sketch layout we see that it’s 235 pixels or something like that. It’s easy to see centering and sometimes the tools support notions like that but often implicit layouts are hard for developers to pick out.

The only answer here is to design with these intent rules in mind and call them out or reverse-engineer them with the help of design by asking “what did you mean here?”. Which brings us to the last point:

**Specify exceptions**

Not everything fits into a neat box and sometimes design is akin to kerning text where we need to take visual weight or color or any one of a hundred different subtle factors into account when doing layout. Exceptional cases should be called out and reused if possible. This is kind of an anti-theme. The things that apply once instead of the things that apply always.

I’m thinking of calling this CSStem (CSS System). I’m not sure what form it will take. Probably a document and some examples along with tooling for generating a style guide/gallery/storybook type of web page as output.
