---
title: "Go to the H1 of the class"
date: 2019-07-03T09:39:29-08:00
url: https://newcome.wordpress.com/2019/07/03/go-to-the-h1-of-the-class/
id: 2665
categories: Uncategorized
tags: 
---

# Go to the H1 of the class

I’m refactoring some HTML right now and it occurs to me that headings are problematic for non-frontend devs and inconsistently used at best among frontenders.

When I was at Yahoo a big part of the styling philosophy revolved around Atomic CSS. These were the kind of predecessor to React’s JS-like inline style declarations. Styles were generated by a post processor based on descriptive short class names. Eg, `display: inline-block` becomes `D-ib` for example (not the real syntax anymore but similar idea). The compiler would generate a the stylesheet to make the class name work, eg

`.D-ib {display: inline-block}`

The reason I’m bringing this up is that headings typically have some styling associated with them. The base stylesheets of browsers define them, and they are block-level at the very least. Most CSS template systems further define them and/or do some kind of “reset” that redefines them.

At a basic level, heading tags are semantic, telling an agent at what level in the hierarchy of information this markup resides. That’s basically it. I’m coming to think that in the age of components we need to treat headings as relative and purely semantic. On one extreme I see developers using just `div` everywhere. This gets around the problem of default stylings but throws away any attempt at semantic hierarchy. Maybe they sprinkle in some non-standard class name scheme for that.

Ideally `H` tags would have no styling different than `div`. Components always start with `H1` at their top level, and would be rewritten during page composition to the appropriate depth based on “root” heading level. Styles are applied separately. Possibly inverting the “additional semantics” pattern by supplying “additional styling” even using `.h1` class names. This seems like an anti-pattern at first but then some common trends in React styling started as anti-patterns as well.
